
The latest information about FatELF can be found at http://icculus.org/fatelf/

What is this?

FatELF is a simple file format that allows you to package several ELF binaries
 in one file. The most obvious use for this is supplying a single executable
 that will run on different processors; a common scenario would be to pack
 both an amd64 and an x86 binary into one file, and let the operating system
 choose the correct one at runtime. FatELF can be used with both executable
 files and shared libraries.

At this time, this documentation assumes a GNU/Linux system, but FatELF could
 theoretically be of use to most modern Unix systems that use ELF binaries.
 FatELF is of no use to Windows, as its EXE files are not ELF format. Mac OS X,
 while it has a Unix heritage, does not use ELF either, but their Mach-O
 format provides something similar to FatELF (Apple refers to this technology
 as "Universal Binaries." It is incompatible with FatELF.) Systems like
 FreeBSD and OpenSolaris use ELF binaries, and could theoretically be made
 to support FatELF as well.


Source code licensing information:

 Patches are contributed under their original licenses. For example, the Linux
  kernel patch is GPLv2, the binutils patch is GPLv3, and the glibc patch is
  LGPL.

 The command line utilities (fatelf-glue, etc) are under the zlib license.
  The text is available in LICENSE.txt, but it basically says "do whatever you
  want with the code."


Using FatELF as an end-user:

 If you're an end-user that just wants to run a FatELF binary that someone
  gave you, you have two options. If you want everything to run smoothly, so
  you run the FatELF files like any other binary, you need to patch your
  system if it doesn't already have FatELF support. It's possible your Linux
  distribution already did this for you. If not, GNU/Linux systems will need
  the patches for the Linux kernel and glibc. Once you have these in place,
  if you just want to run FatELF binaries, you're done. Have fun!

 If you want file(1) to recognize FatELF binaries instead of calling them
  "data", you'll want that patch, too.

 If you can't patch your system, you can use the command line tools to extract
  the specific ELF file you need, and run that instead. See the "building the
  command line tools" section, then try running this:

   fatelf-split my_fatelf_binary

 If the FatELF file contained x86 and amd64 binaries, you'll end up with files
  named "my_fatelf_binary-i386" and "my_fatelf_binary-x86_64". Use whichever
  you need at this point like any other program. Another option is to extract
  just the binary you need, like this...

   fatelf-extract my_elf_binary my_fatelf_binary x86_64

 ...this will extract the amd64 ELF binary from my_fatelf_binary, and place it
  in the file "my_elf_binary".


Using FatELF as a developer:

 If you're a developer that wants to work with FatELF files, you will want to
  have your system patched (Linux kernel, glibc), so that you can run FatELF
  binaries directly. You may want to patch binutils and gdb, too, but this is
  only necessary if you want to link directly against a FatELF library or
  debug a FatELF binary/library. In many cases, you can get away
  without this functionality. You'll want to get the command line tools
  installed (see the "Building the command line tools" section).

 The most common workflow is usually to build your software for all platforms,
  separately, and then use fatelf-glue to create FatELF files out of the
  separate ELF binaries. So long as the soname doesn't change, it is safe to
  link against an ELF shared library and then later turn that shared library
  into a FatELF file. The system loaders will still do the right thing.
  Alternately, if you patched binutils, you can create the FatELF shared
  library first, and then link against it as normal.

 In many cases, you only care about FatELF when you are ready to ship your
  binaries to the outside world, so it's possible to simply use fatelf-glue
  at the end of the process and never patch a single thing on your development
  box.


Using FatELF as a system/tool developer:

 If you are bringing FatELF support to a new platform or development tool, you
  should probably examine include/fatelf.h for the data structures, and read
  fatelf-specification.txt. The format is not particularly complex. The only
  requirement is that your platform support ELF binaries, as that is where
  most of the complexity lies. FatELF is just a simple wrapper around
  traditional ELF files. The existing command line tools will probably Just
  Work on your platform out of the box.

 Please drop Ryan a line at icculus@icculus.org if you add FatELF support to
  your software, so he can post a link to it on the FatELF website.


Building the command line tools:

 You will need to have a system set up for compiling C code, and you will need
  CMake (http://www.cmake.org/). If you are looking for the latest and greatest
  version of the tools, you'll need Mercurial to download them. If you're
  installing from a source tarball, Mercurial isn't necessary.

 If you're on a Debian or Ubuntu system, you can probably run this to prepare:

   sudo apt-get install build-essential cmake mercurial

 Once you are ready, you should get the source code. If downloading via
  Mercurial, this command line should do:

   hg clone http://hg.icculus.org/icculus/fatelf

 If you are using a source tarball, just extract it.

 Now make a build directory, configure the build, and compile the sources:

   mkdir fatelf-build
   cd fatelf-build
   cmake ../fatelf
   make

 You should end up with a pile of binaries, with names like "fatelf-glue" and
  "fatelf-info", etc. If you want to install them system-wide, you can do so
  now:

   sudo make install

 ("sudo make install DESTDIR=/some/other/path" also works.)


Using the command line tools:

 Most of the tools expect command line arguments in some form like...

   fatelf-COMMAND OUTPUT INPUT TARGET

 ...where COMMAND is the tool to run, OUTPUT is the file you want to create
 with the results of the operation, INPUT is the file you want to process, and
 TARGET is the target platform. Please note that output files will overwrite
 existing files of the same name without warning.

 TARGET takes the form of either a specific record number in the form "recordX"
  where X is the index of the record in the FatELF file ("record0" is the
  first record, "record1" the next, etc), or a formal target name. Formal
  names look like this: "x86_64:64bits:le:sysv:osabiver0" ... that's a real
  mouthful! All of the fields in a target name are optional. The only
  requirement is that the name be unique enough to only refer to a single
  record in a given FatELF file. In most cases, you'll only need the machine
  architecture; if you have a FatELF file with x86 and amd64 ELF binaries, your
  target names can be, simply, "i386" and "x86_64". If you have two SPARC
  binaries that are only separated by word size, you could do "32bits" and
  "64bits", but if you added an amd64 binary to that FatELF file, you'd need
  to do "sparc:64bits" to stay unique. Two PowerPC binaries, one for bigendian
  mode and one for little endian, could say "le" or "be" to be unique. If you
  want the full target name for a given record, fatelf-info will list them for
  you.



 The actual tools are:


  fatelf-glue OUTPUT INPUT1 INPUT2 [... INPUTn]

   This takes the ELF binaries listed on the command line (as INPUT*), and
    glues them together into a FatELF binary named OUTPUT. The files' ELF
    headers are read to construct the proper FatELF data structures. It is an
    error to try to glue two ELF binaries with the same target together, and
    fatelf-glue will refuse to do so.


  fatelf-info INPUT

   Report interesting information about FatELF file INPUT. This will list
    all fields of all FatELF records, and the full formal target name for
    each.


  fatelf-extract OUTPUT INPUT TARGET

   Extract a copy of the ELF binary that matches TARGET from FatELF file INPUT,
    and write it to OUTPUT. If TARGET is ambiguous, this operation fails.


  fatelf-remove OUTPUT INPUT TARGET

   Remove the ELF binary that matches TARGET from FatELF file INPUT,
    and write a new FatELF file that lacks that ELF binary to OUTPUT.
    If TARGET is ambiguous, this operation fails.


  fatelf-replace OUTPUT INPUT NEWELF

   Replace an ELF binary in FatELF file INPUT with the one in file NEWELF,
    and write a new FatELF file with the replacment made. This tool figures
    out which binary to replace by reading the headers in NEWELF.


  fatelf-split INPUT

   Split FatELF file INPUT into multiple ELF files, one per included target.
    The files will be named INPUT-targetname, where targetname is a formal
    target name in the shortest form possible that prevents ambiguity between
    included targets. This can overwrite existing files in the same directory
    as INPUT without warning, so use with caution. fatelf-extract can be a
    safer alternative.


  fatelf-verify INPUT TARGET

   Check if there is an ELF binary in FatELF file INPUT that matches the
    target name TARGET, and set the process exit code appropriately. This
    reports zero if TARGET was found, and non-zero if not. If TARGET is
    ambiguous, this is considered an error, and non-zero is reported.


  fatelf-validate INPUT

   Run several tests on FatELF file INPUT to make sure the data is consistent
    and sane. This will return non-zero if there are problems detected, or
    zero if the tool believes that the FatELF file is correctly formed. Please
    note that this is meant to be a sanity check and debugging aid, but will
    not detect most forms of file corruption, either intentional or accidental.


// end of documentation.txt ...

